---
layout: post
title: Hero No. 1, A Pai Family Holiday Gift
---

Every year since I left home for college 7 years ago, my immediate family of 4 (mom, dad, sister)
has reunited in our South Bay home for a week or two during the Christmas holiday. Typically this time
is spent eating/cooking, celebrating with close family friends, and occasionally traveling. Another
constant is the annual unwrapping of mom's school gifts. My mom (an elementary school teacher) receives
a good 60 gifts from her second and third graders each year. This gift opening event is I-kid-you-not
a 3+ hour event, where we sit in the living room and my mom opens the gifts while forcing my sister
and I to do bookkeeping and write the thank you cards.

Year after year the distribution of these gifts has remained roughly the same. The highest represented
groups are the gift card folks (Target, Starbucks, Macy's, AMC movie tickets), the Micasa china
set folks (i.e instant white elephant re-gifts), the chocolate folks, and the homemade good folks. This
last group is always the most exciting for me, because, well, handmade gifts are the best gifts.
There's something special about opening up a jar of homemade olallieberry jam, a bar of aromatic
soap, or pieces of nut brittle that have been painstakingly wrapped, sealed and decorated.

This year I decided it'd be fun to create and distribute our own homemade gift for the holidays as
a family. It would be something from the Pais. I knew I wanted it to be food, and I liked the
presentation of mason jars so I decided we would go with that combination. After some thinking I
narrowed it down to granola or sauce. Sauce seemed more versatile of the two (plus, who doesn't like
sauce?) so I went with that. My vision was to do a classic sauce that most would be familiar
with, but add an Indian kick. The result: tandoori bbq sauce.

{% include section_break.html %}

## Brainstorming and R&D

After extensive research (i.e a single Google search) I found some [inspiration](http://www.foodrepublic.com/recipes/tandoori-barbecue-sauce-recipe/) online. We ended up using much of this recipe as the foundation of our sauce. The next day mom,
Did, and I went shopping for ingredients and arts/crafts for the packaging.

{% include section_break.html %}

## Product Development

One day near the end of break I decided it was time to execute. We split up work as follows:

+  I was product manager.
+  Did (my sister) was to head up branding and packaging.
+  Mom was a swiss-army knife, doing whatever was needed.
+  Dad was in charge of watching football and doing ad-hoc work on the side.

The first order of business was sterilizing the jars. This is something the Pais are highly trained in,
as my dad cans much of his summer tomato crop every year for use during the colder winter months. Sterilizing jars
couldn't be easier: you first rinse them in warm soapy water and then basically boil them.

In parallel, we developed the product. Basically this consisted of adding ingredients one at a
time to a large pot that was going slow and steady and modifying ratios to taste.

After the sauce was just right, we filled up the sterilized jars and sealed them. The keys here were
to let the sauce cool before packaging and also not filling up the jars to be too full. Once filled,
we gently lidded the jars (not more than finger tight) and boiled them for 45 minutes to create airtight
seals (also a part of the canning process).

{% include section_break.html %}

## Branding & Packaging

The next step was figuring out what we were going to call the product, what to include on the label,
and how the label would look. The goal was to be thoughtful and to spark excitement in the recipients
of this gift — the delight factor needed to be high.

To that end, I rallied the troops and we did a little visual brainstorm exercise. I gave each person
a blank sheet of paper with the label shape pre-drawn, and we all doodled different versions of what
the label would look like and what we would call the sauce.

Things we ended up keeping were: title, subtitle, use cases, and "made with <3 in San Jose". We axed
an ingredients list, recipes, and serving sizes.

{% include image_with_caption.html
           url="/assets/images/hero_no_1/label_front.jpg"
           caption="The front of the Hero No. 1 label."
           alt="label_front" %}

Dad also came through big by coming up with a name! He suggested Hero No. 1, a reference to a 1997
Bollywood film with the same name starring the famous Hindi actor Govinda. The name was playful,
distinctly Indian, and had just enough syllables, so we went with it.

Did finalized the look and feel of the label, including little iconography for the use cases:

{% include image_with_caption.html
           url="/assets/images/hero_no_1/label_back.jpg"
           caption="Iconography on the back of the Hero No. 1 label."
           alt="label_back" %}

And we were done! The last thing to do was to reproduce the label many, many times by hand.

{% include section_break.html %}

## Distribution

The final step of this process was to actually give distribute our sauce to family and friends! We
chose folks who one of us was close to and that really enjoyed cooking and/or food. The closest
delivery was a about 1 mile away. The farthest, about 3000 with help from the USPS.

{% include image_with_caption.html
           url="/assets/images/hero_no_1/collection.jpg"
           caption="The final products."
           alt="final_products" %}

{% include section_break.html %}

## Conclusion

This project was a simple way of bringing the family together. It was creative and everyone was able
to contribute something unique the project. It was also introduce my parents to a lot of the product
development ways of thinking I deal with on a day-to-day basis. This looks to be a start of an annual
tradition :-)

{% include image_with_caption.html
           url="/assets/images/hero_no_1/single_unit.jpg"
           caption="A single unit."
           alt="single_unit" %}

